enterprise-release: 26.1 Documentation (#1303)
seqeralabs/docs: changelog/seqera-enterprise/v26.1.md

### Compute environments

- Added separate head and worker pool support for Azure Batch compute environments in both Forge and manual modes.
- Added ability to disable a compute environment.
- Improved Seqera Compute integration.
- Improved compute environment form warning display with individual stacked alerts.
- New environment variable added. See the [Configuration overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview) for the full descriptions and defaults:
  - [`TOWER_COMPUTE_ENV_CLEANUP_*`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#compute-environment-cleanup)

### Azure

- Changed default Azure Batch job timeout to 7 days and exposed it as a new configuration item.
- Updated default Azure termination policy in compute environment creation form.
- Added VNet and subnet support for Azure Batch compute environments.
- Added support for separate managed identity client IDs for head and compute jobs in Azure Batch.

> - Enabled Entra (service principal) credentials for Azure Batch Forge pool creation and Fusion v2.

Author: ```suggestion
- Enabled [Entra service principal credentials](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/compute-envs/azure-batch#managed-identity) for Azure Batch Forge pool creation and Fusion v2.
```

---
title: Seqera Enterprise v26.1
date: 2026-05-15
tags: [enterprise]
---

> Significant integration, troubleshooting, and management improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Seqera Enterprise v26.1 broadens and scales the platform's capabilities across pipeline launches, AI, cloud infrastructure, data management, and compliance. Co-Scientist is now available for Enterprise deployments. Pipelines now support a GitHub App manifest flow for credential creation and higher throughput than personal access tokens (PATs). Compute environments support descriptions and can be disabled, and Google Batch and Azure Batch have significant stability and scalability improvements. On the cloud provider integration side, AWS, Azure, and GCP each gain deeper credential and identity management including Workload Identity Federation (WIF) for Google and Entra service principal support for Azure Batch. Nextflow data lineage is configurable and attached to pipeline runs and Data Explorer objects. Existing Studios can be edited, and new workspace settings for custom container registry controls and default collaboration modes provide top-down granular management. Datasets now support linked (URL-referenced) remotely-hosted data. Data Explorer adds IGV and Molstar 3D viewer for genomic and structural files, respectively. Audit Logs have a new user interface with on-demand CSV export with configurable max records and richer event context. Finally, the Admin panel exposes real-time usage metrics.
```

:::info
The legacy distribution endpoint at `cr.seqera.io/private` is deprecated. Only bug fixes for existing major releases will continue to be published there. New major releases of Seqera Platform are available from `cr.seqera.io/enterprise`. Seqera will provide updated credentials for the new endpoint — [contact your Seqera representative](https://support.seqera.io) if you need access.
:::

## Feature updates and improvements

### Co-Scientist

> - Co-Scientist for Enterprise.

Author: @odagayev, @vpatel85: Could you link me to your release notes or a summary for 26.1 so we can add them to the 26.1 changelog? Thank you!

> - Co-Scientist for Enterprise.

Author: ```suggestion
- [Co-Scientist for Enterprise](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/install-co-scientist).
```

### Studios

> - Studios are now enabled on all workspaces by default. See the [Upgrade guide](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/upgrade#studios-enabled-on-all-workspaces-by-default) for more information.

Reviewer: This is a hallucination.

```suggestion
```

> - Improved Studios session management and stability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add workspace setting for default Studios session collaboration.
```

> - Updated Studios micromamba builds to use `conda/micromamba:v2` and Wave 1.33.0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Custom studio containers now support multi-stage builds and Wave `v1.33.0`.
```

- Added `nameStrategy` configuration option to Studios workspace settings.

> - Renamed Studios settings route from `data-studios` to `studios`.

Reviewer: Remove - this is internal URL routing and not customer-facing.
```suggestion
```

> - Added ability to edit stopped Studios without restarting them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added ability to edit the settings of stopped Studios.
```

- [Container registry improvements](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/studios/custom-envs), including:
  - Configurable container repository path for custom image builds.
  - Configurable container image naming strategy (default, tag prefix, image suffix, none).

> - Studios work with Wine/XFCE/VNC (Windows compatible OS).

Reviewer: Although this works, it's fraught.
```suggestion
```

> - New environment variables added. See the [Configuration overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview) for the full descriptions and defaults:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- New environment variables added. See [Data features](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features):
```

>   - New Studios family variables for default lifespan, privacy default, list page size, feature manifest URL, Connect iframe scoping, Wave build status checks, disallowed registries, and startup metrics. See [Data features](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - SSH settings: 
    - Allowed workspaces
    - Enable key management
    - Limit SSH connections to authenticated sessions via key fingerprint
    - Custom SSH server domain
    - Custom connection string display port
  - Custom Studio images:
    - Disallowed image repositories
    - Image naming strategy
    - Wave build status checks
  - Default privacy settings (private vs. collaborative by default)
  - Studios displayed per page
  - Feature manifest URL for version compatibility checks
  - Per workspace startup metrics & retention policy
```

### GCP

- Added [Workload Identity Federation (WIF) credential support](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/compute-envs/google-cloud-batch#authentication-methods) for Google Batch and Google Cloud compute environments.
- Added support for network tagging in Google Batch.
- Added boot disk image selection for Google Batch compute environments.
- Added support for multiple machine types in Google Batch compute environments.
- [Configurable retry behavior](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/compute-envs/google-cloud-batch#gcp-resources) for tasks with null exit codes in Google Batch compute environments.

### Pipelines

- Redesigned workflow notification email templates with updated styling.
- Added GitHub App manifest flow for credential creation.
- Improved clipboard UX in workflow details header.
- Updated schema radio control copy.
- Redesigned report preview modal header layout and modal.
- Registered Nextflow CLI as a static OIDC client for authorization code with PKCE flow.
- Enriched the `POST /trace/create` response with platform metadata to reduce downstream API calls from Nextflow. (link needed)

### Datasets

> - Added preview support for linked (URL-referenced) dataset versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added preview for linked (URL-referenced) datasets.
```

### Data Explorer

> - Added data lake support in Data Explorer.

Reviewer: I don't know what this means so remove. Unless @t0randr or @weronikasosnowskaseqera you know what this pertains to?

```suggestion
```

> - Added Molstar 3D viewer for PDB and CIF file preview.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added [IGV](https://github.com/igvteam/igv.js) for genomic data visualization
- Added [Molstar](https://molstar.org/) 3D viewer for molecular data visualization
```

> - Added extensible view mode selection for JSON files in Data Explorer (JSON, IGV, and plain text).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Added extensible view mode selection for JSON files in Data Explorer (JSON, IGV, and plain text).
- Added auto-detection for IGV-renderable files (`.bam`, `.bed`, etc)
```

  - [`TOWER_AUDIT_LOG_V2_CSV_EXPORT_MAX_LOGS`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#audit-log-v2)
  - [`TOWER_AUDIT_LOG_V2_PRE_POST_CHANGE_ENABLED`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#audit-log-v2)
  - [`TOWER_CRON_AUDIT_LOG_CLEAN_UP_*`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#audit-log-v2)

### General

- Bumped Micronaut from 4.7.6 to 4.8.3.
- Improved admin workspace list toolbar responsiveness.
- Applied updated status icons across platform components.
- Redesigned page header layout with improved toolbar and breadcrumb integration.
- Added automatic breadcrumb navigation to page headers.
- Updated delete workspace confirmation modal text to clarify the impact of deletion.
- Removed the dynamic resource labels feature toggle (feature is now always active).

## Bug fixes

### Studios

- Added workspace existence check before creating Studios workspace settings.
- Added validation of Git repository configuration files when creating a Studio.

> - Fixed broken navigation from Studio details page for private Studios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Fixed broken navigation from Studio details page for private Studios.
- R-IDE respects compute environment or Studio specific environment variables
- Fix CSP header empty directive
```

- Added GitHub App manifest flow for credential creation.
- Improved clipboard UX in workflow details header.
- Updated schema radio control copy.
- Redesigned report preview modal header layout and modal.
- Registered Nextflow CLI as a static OIDC client for authorization code with PKCE flow.
- Enriched the `POST /trace/create` response with platform metadata to reduce downstream API calls from Nextflow. (link needed)

### Datasets

- Added preview support for linked (URL-referenced) dataset versions.

### Data Explorer

- Added data lake support in Data Explorer.
- Added Molstar 3D viewer for PDB and CIF file preview.
- Added extensible view mode selection for JSON files in Data Explorer (JSON, IGV, and plain text).
- Updated Data Explorer to display non-native browser files as text when opened in a new tab.
- Added Fusion symlink resolution to the Data Explorer API.
- Increased the maximum data link name length to 512 characters.

### Access control

- Added required description field to custom role creation.
- Exposed roles API endpoints in the OpenAPI specification.
- Added SSO domain-based redirect for the login guard.

> ### Monitoring and observability

Author: @llewellyn-sl, could you take a stab at a more consolidated/logical list? I meant to ask Andrew before he went on leave. Thanks!

- Added `nameStrategy` configuration option to Studios workspace settings.
- Added ability to edit the settings of stopped Studios.
- [Container registry improvements](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/studios/custom-envs), including:
  - Configurable container repository path for custom image builds.
  - Configurable container image naming strategy (default, tag prefix, image suffix, none).
- New environment variables added. See [Data features](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features):
  - SSH settings: 
    - Allowed workspaces
    - Enable key management
    - Limit SSH connections to authenticated sessions via key fingerprint
    - Custom SSH server domain
    - Custom connection string display port
  - Custom Studio images:
    - Disallowed image repositories
    - Image naming strategy
    - Wave build status checks
  - Default privacy settings (private vs. collaborative by default)
  - Studios displayed per page
  - Feature manifest URL for version compatibility checks
  - Per workspace startup metrics & retention policy

### Compute environments

> - Added separate head and worker pool support for Azure Batch compute environments in both Forge and manual modes.

Reviewer 2: Can this be in the Azure section?

- Added ability to disable a compute environment.
- Improved Seqera Compute integration.
- Improved compute environment form warning display with individual stacked alerts.
- New environment variable added. See the [Configuration overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview) for the full descriptions and defaults:
  - [`TOWER_COMPUTE_ENV_CLEANUP_*`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#compute-environment-cleanup)

### Azure

- Changed default Azure Batch job timeout to 7 days and exposed it as a new configuration item.
- Updated default Azure termination policy in compute environment creation form.
- Added VNet and subnet support for Azure Batch compute environments.

> - Added support for separate managed identity client IDs for head and compute jobs in Azure Batch.

Reviewer 2: managed identity client IDs *and* resource IDs

---
title: Seqera Platform Enterprise v26.1
date: 2026-04-07
tags: [enterprise]
---

> Significant integration, troubleshooting, and management improvements.

Author: @robnewman, could you draft an introductory paragraph for the release notes? Thank you!

:::info
The legacy distribution endpoint at `cr.seqera.io/private` is deprecated. Only bug fixes for existing major releases will continue to be published there. New major releases of Seqera Platform are available from `cr.seqera.io/enterprise`. Seqera will provide updated credentials for the new endpoint — [contact your Seqera representative](https://support.seqera.io) if you need access.
:::

## Feature updates and improvements

### Studios

> - Improved Studios session management and stability.

Author: @robnewman, the workflow generated this and it's pretty vague. Are there specific changes you want to call out?

- Updated Studios micromamba builds to use `conda/micromamba:v2` and Wave 1.33.0.
- Added `nameStrategy` configuration option to Studios workspace settings.
- Renamed Studios settings route from `data-studios` to `studios`.
- Added ability to edit stopped Studios without restarting them.

> - Container registry improvements:

Author: ```suggestion
- [Container registry improvements](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/studios/custom-envs), including:
```

  - Configurable container repository path for custom image builds.
  - Configurable container image naming strategy (default, tag prefix, image suffix, none).
- Studios work with Wine/XFCE/VNC (Windows compatible OS).
- New environment variables added. See the [Configuration overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview) for the full descriptions and defaults:
  - New Studios family variables for default lifespan, privacy default, list page size, feature manifest URL, Connect iframe scoping, Wave build status checks, disallowed registries, and startup metrics. See [Data features](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features).
  - [`TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features). See [Upgrade guide](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/upgrade).

> ### Compute environments

Author: @MichaelTansiniSeqera, @cristianrcv please review this section for accuracy and completeness. Thank you! :)

Reviewer 3: LGTM

- Added ability to disable a compute environment.
- Improved Seqera Compute integration.
- Improved compute environment form warning display with individual stacked alerts.
- New environment variable added. See the [Configuration overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview) for the full descriptions and defaults:
  - [`TOWER_COMPUTE_ENV_CLEANUP_*`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#compute-environment-cleanup)

### Azure

- Changed default Azure Batch job timeout to 7 days and exposed it as a new configuration item.
- Updated default Azure termination policy in compute environment creation form.
- Added VNet and subnet support for Azure Batch compute environments.
- Added support for separate managed identity client IDs for head and compute jobs in Azure Batch.
- Enabled Entra (service principal) credentials for Azure Batch Forge pool creation and Fusion v2.

### AWS

- Added AWS credential modes with support for key-based and role-based access.
- Added AWS External ID support for role-based credentials.

### GCP

> - Added Workload Identity Federation (WIF) credential support for Google Batch and Google Cloud compute environments.

Author: ```suggestion
- Added [Workload Identity Federation (WIF) credential support](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/compute-envs/google-cloud-batch#authentication-methods) for Google Batch and Google Cloud compute environments.
```

- Added support for network tagging in Google Batch.
- Added boot disk image selection for Google Batch compute environments.
- Added support for multiple machine types in Google Batch compute environments.

> - Configurable retry behavior for tasks with null exit codes in Google Batch compute environments.

Author: ```suggestion
- [Configurable retry behavior](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/compute-envs/google-cloud-batch#gcp-resources) for tasks with null exit codes in Google Batch compute environments.
```

- Added SSO domain-based redirect for the login guard.

### Monitoring and observability

**Admin panel**

- Added real-time active user count display.
- Added workspace usage metrics.

**Audit logs v2: new capabilities**

- Added CSV export from the admin audit logs v2 table, with a configurable maximum record limit.
- Switched to token-based pagination for improved performance.
- Added comprehensive logging for SSO lifecycle events.
- Added descriptions and documentation metadata to audit event types, and renamed outdated event types for consistency.

**Audit logs v2: richer event context**

- Added owner ID and workspace ID metadata to Studios session audit events and to all data link audit events.
- Added target organization, workspace, and user context to audit log v2 interfaces.
- Added a `target_name` field to the data model and surfaced target resource names across event emission points, the admin table, the API, the UI, and CSV exports.

**Audit logs v2: migration and cleanup**

- Migrated telemetry usage queries to the v2 table.
- Updated the audit log cleaner to handle both v1 and v2 tables.
- Deprecated the legacy /admin/audit-logs (v1) endpoint.

> - Removed unused instanceId and instanceName columns from the v2 table.

Author: ```suggestion
- Removed unused `instanceId` and `instanceName` columns from the v2 table.
```

### Data Explorer

- Fixed IGV MIME type detection in Data Explorer.

### Access control

- Fixed refresh token JWT secret configuration for enterprise deployments.
- Hardened the Auth0 OAuth2 flow with retries against `ResponseClosedException` errors.
- Fixed `auth0org_id` column naming to align with Hibernate naming strategy.
- Fixed erroneous `@QueryValue` annotations on SSO controller path variables causing 404 errors.
- Fixed `@PermissionRequired` interceptor binding with `@Type` annotation.
- Fixed `@JWTAuthRequired` interceptor binding with `@Type` annotation to prevent silent bypass.

### Monitoring and observability

- Fixed dashboard drop-down scrolling and character overflow.
- Fixed task logging to use populated `taskId` instead of empty `id`.
- Fixed `user_sign_in` audit events to correctly populate the actor field with the signing user's ID.

### General

- Fixed side navigation width not updating in Safari when toggling the collapsed state.
- Fixed credits banner appearing during page load.
- Fixed oversized icon on the forbidden access page.

## Upgrade notes

### Breaking changes

#### Audit log versions in 26.1

> Seqera Platform Enterprise 26.1 introduces the audit log v2 schema as a **breaking change** for direct database consumers and custom ETL jobs.

Author: ```suggestion
Seqera Platform Enterprise 26.1 introduces the [audit log v2 schema](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/monitoring/audit-logs#audit-log-versions-in-261) as a **breaking change** for direct database consumers and custom ETL jobs.
```

  - Configurable container repository path for custom image builds.
  - Configurable container image naming strategy (default, tag prefix, image suffix, none).
- Studios work with Wine/XFCE/VNC (Windows compatible OS).
- New environment variables added. See the [Configuration overview](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview) for the full descriptions and defaults:
  - New Studios family variables for default lifespan, privacy default, list page size, feature manifest URL, Connect iframe scoping, Wave build status checks, disallowed registries, and startup metrics. See [Data features](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features).

>   - [`TOWER_DATA_STUDIO_ALLOWED_WORKSPACES`](https://docs.seqera.io/platform-enterprise/enterprise/configuration/overview#data-features)

Reviewer 4: should this link to the `Studios — enabled on all workspaces by default` section in the `upgrade` docs page, or at least mention that it's no longer needed to enable studios?

Author: Yep, will do!
